[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
100 MILLION YEARS AGO
IN THE CRETACEOUS PERIOD,
THE OPEN UNIVERSITY HERE
IN MILTON KEYNES, AND I,
WOULD HAVE BEEN
SUBMERGED BENEATH THE SEA.
AND IF I WANT TO SEE
THE EVIDENCE FOR THAT,
I HAVE ONLY TO TRAVEL
A FEW MILES SOUTH FROM HERE
ALONG THE OLD ROMAN ROAD
TO LONDON--
WATLING STREET,
OR THE A5 AS WE CALL IT NOW.
THIS QUARRY HERE
GIVES US A GOOD SECTION
THROUGH THE LOWER PART OF THE
CRETACEOUS SEQUENCE HEREABOUTS.
AT THE BOTTOM OF THE QUARRY
IS THE LOWER GREENSAND
OF LATE APTIAN AGE,
AND ABOVE THAT
IS THE ALBIAN GAULT CLAY.
THE LOWER GREENSAND
CONSISTS OF A VARIETY
OF MARGINAL AND INSHORE
SHALLOW MARINE SANDY FACIES
WITH QUITE A LOT OF EVIDENCE
FOR TIDAL CURRENT ACTIVITIES
SUCH AS MUD DRAPES,
AND HERRINGBONE
CROSS-STRATIFICATION.
THE GAULT CLAY,
BY CONTRAST, CONSISTS ONLY OF
FINE-GRAIN TERRIGENOUS DEPOSITS
CARRIED MUCH FURTHER OFFSHORE
AND ALLOWED TO SETTLE
OUT IN DEEPER WATER.
THE GAULT IS EASILY ERODED AND
SO GIVES RISE TO THE LOW GROUND
THAT WE CAN SEE OFF
TO THE SOUTH AND WEST FROM HERE
IN THE EASTWARD EXTENSION
OF THE VALE OF AYLESBURY.
IF WE WANT TO SEE THE
NEXT UNIT UP IN THE SEQUENCE,
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO TRAVEL
FURTHER SOUTH AGAIN.
I'M JUST A COUPLE OF MILES
NORTH OF DUNSTABLE HERE,
AND WE CAN SEE THE LOW VALE
UNDERLAIN BY THE GAULT CLAY
ABUTTING AGAINST THE CHILTERN
ESCARPMENT ON THE HORIZON,
WHICH IS FORMED
BY THE LOWER PART OF THE CHALK,
OR THE GRAY CHALK
AS IT'S TECHNICALLY CALLED,
WHICH IS OF CENOMANIAN AGE.
WE CAN SEE
SOME OF THAT CHALK CROPPING OUT
IN ABANDONED CEMENT QUARRIES
DOTTED ALONG THE TOP
OF THE ESCARPMENT.
LET.S GO AND TAKE A CLOSER LOOK.
HERE WE ARE THEN IN ONE
OF THESE ABANDONED QUARRIES,
SOMEWHAT OVERGROWN,
BUT WE CAN STILL SEE
THE WHITE FACIES FORMED BY
THE MASSIVE DEPOSITS OF CHALK.
AND A CURIOUS DEPOSIT
IT IS TOO.
DEVOID OF THE
SILISICLASTIC SEDIMENTS,
THE SANDS AND MUDS THAT WE SAW
LOWER DOWN IN THE SUCCESSION,
IT'S A FINE, WHITE, POWDERY
LIMESTONE, WHICH CONTAINS
SCATTERED MACRO-FOSSILS,
INCLUDING PARTICULARLY
THE REMAINS OF SUCH
FREE-SWIMMING FORMS
AS THIS AMMONITE HERE.
SO WE'VE PASSED FROM
INSHORE SHALLOW MARINE
SILISICLASTIC DEPOSITS
UP TO FINE WHITE CHALKS,
WHICH MUST HAVE BEEN DEPOSITED
IN WATER DEEP ENOUGH
FOR SUCH ANIMALS AS AMMONITES
TO SWIM AROUND IN,
AND SUFFICIENTLY FAR OFFSHORE
FOR THERE TO HAVE BEEN
VERY LITTLE SILISICLASTIC INPUT
FROM THE LAND.
IN OTHER WORDS, IT'S A STRONGLY
TRANSGRESSIVE SUCCESSION,
AND THAT MEANS THAT
THERE MUST HAVE BEEN
A SIGNIFICANT RISE
IN RELATIVE SEA-LEVEL.
IT'S WHAT'S
SOMETIMES REFERRED TO AS
"THE GREAT CRETACEOUS
TRANSGRESSION..
NARRATOR: THE FINE-GRAINED
MATRIX OF THE CHALK
IS MAINLY COMPOSED
OF THE SKELETAL REMAINS
OF MICROSCOPIC
PLANKTONIC ORGANISMS,
ESPECIALLY COCCOLITHOPHORES.
SEDIMENT CORE SAMPLES HARVESTED
BY OCEAN-DRILLING SHIPS
SHOW THAT TODAY
THESE SINGLE-CELLED ALGAE
TYPICALLY OCCUPY
OCEANIC WATERS,
AND THAT THEIR
ACCUMULATED REMAINS
ARE ABUNDANT IN THE SHALLOWER
PARTS OF THE OCEAN FLOOR.
SO, IN THE CRETACEOUS,
THE RISE IN SEA LEVEL
SEEMS TO HAVE ALLOWED
OCEANIC WATER MASSES
TO FLOOD
ONTO THE CONTINENTS.
THE RISE IN SEA LEVEL
WAS TRULY GLOBAL IN EXTENT,
WITH SHELF SEAS
SPREADING ACROSS
LARGE AREAS
OF THE CONTINENTS.
IN CENOMANIAN TIMES,
WHILE THE GREY CHALK
WAS ACCUMULATING IN ENGLAND,
VAST CARBONATE PLATFORMS
DEVELOPED IN THE SHALLOW SEAS
THAT FORMED
AT LOWER LATITUDES
IN AND AROUND THE CONJOINED
TETHYS AND ATLANTIC OCEANS.
THOSE OF THE WESTERN TETHYS
WERE PARTICULARLY
WELL DEVELOPED AT THAT TIME,
AND THIS PROGRAM
WILL LOOK IN DETAIL
AT THE DEVELOPMENT
OF ONE OF THESE PLATFORMS,
THE ADRIATIC
CARBONATE PLATFORM.
THIS WAS ONE OF
THE LARGE ISOLATED PLATFORMS
THAT THEN LAY
IN THE CENTRAL PART
OF THE WESTERN TETHYAN OCEAN.
TODAY, FOLLOWING THE CLOSURE
OF THE TETHYS OCEAN,
THE LIMESTONES OF
THE ADRIATIC CARBONATE PLATFORM
ARE INCORPORATED
IN THE DINARIC MOUNTAIN CHAIN,
THE NORTHERN PART OF WHICH
RUNS ALONG THE ADRIATIC COAST
OF WESTERN CROATIA.
THE CRETACEOUS
PLATFORM DEPOSITS
ARE PARTICULARLY
WELL EXPOSED,
WITH RELATIVELY
LITTLE DEFORMATION,
IN THE PENINSULA OF ISTRIA,
SITUATED AT THE NORTHERN END
OF THE ADRIATIC SEA.
SKELTON: WELCOME TO PULA
IN THE SOUTHERN PART
OF THE ISTRIAN PENINSULA
OF CROATIA,
AND ITS SPECTACULARLY
WELL-PRESERVED ROMAN ARENA.
WHEN THEY BUILT IT IN THE FIRST
TO THE SECOND CENTURY A.D.,
THE ROMANS HAD
NO PROBLEM AT ALL
TO FIND SUITABLE BUILDING STONE
IN THE SURROUNDING COUNTRYSIDE,
FOR MOST OF ISTRIA
IS UNDERLAIN
BY CLEAN, WHITE
CRETACEOUS LIMESTONES
WHICH CAN BE CUT
INTO BLOCKS OF ANY DESIRED SIZE.
I'M HERE TO MEET IGOR VLAHOVICH,
FROM THE INSTITUTE OF GEOLOGY,
THAT'S THE
NATIONAL GEOLOGICAL SURVEY,
AND WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A CLOSER
LOOK AT SOME OF THIS LIMESTONE
AND HOW IT WAS FORMED.
HI, IGOR.
HI, PETER.
WHAT.S IT LIKE THEN?
IT'S A BIOCLASTIC MEDIUM
TO COARSE-GRAINED PACK STONE
TO GRAIN STONE AND IT IS
COMPOSED OF FINE GRAINED DEBRIS,
BUT ALSO OF ENTIRE SHELLS
AND PARTS OF RUDIST
AND MOLLUSK SHELLS.
IT'S ABSOLUTELY
BEAUTIFUL, ISN'T IT?
THIS IS A LOVELY EXAMPLE HERE
OF A... OF A TYPICAL RUDIST
WITH THE OUTER SHELL THERE
OF CALCITE, NICELY PRESERVED,
RATHER DARK-BROWN COLOR HERE,
AND INSIDE THAT,
THE RATHER THICKER
NOW WHITE SHELL THERE
WHICH WAS
ORIGINALLY ARAGONITE,
BUT OF COURSE BEEN
DISSOLVED AWAY NOW
AND THE CAVITY
HAS BEEN PARTIALLY FILLED
WITH SPARRY CALCITE.
WHAT.S... WHAT.S THE AGE
OF THIS MATERIAL?
CONCERNING MICRO-
PALEONTOLOGICAL EVIDENCE,
MOSTLY BENTHIC FORAMINIFER
AND OF COURSE RUDISTS,
WE KNOW THAT
IT IS OF CENOMANIAN AGE.
PRECISELY, IT IS OF THE UPPER
PART OF THE LOWER CENOMANIAN
TO LOWER PART
OF THE MIDDLE CENOMANIAN.
OK, SO THAT.S ABOUT EQUIVALENT
TO THE LOWER CHALK IN ENGLAND.
YES, IT.S ABOUT
95 MILLION YEARS OLD.
THE RUDISTS, WITH THEIR
ASSOCIATED BIOTA
WERE THEREFORE RESPONSIBLE
FOR GENERATING THE VAST AMOUNTS
OF SHELL DEBRIS AND SAND
WHICH EVENTUALLY MADE UP
THESE LIMESTONES,
AND THIS ROCK TYPE
IS A VERY IMPORTANT COMPONENT
OF THE VAST CARBONATE PLATFORMS
THAT WERE DISTRIBUTED THROUGH
THE TETHYAN-ATLANTIC SEAWAY
OF THE CRETACEOUS WORLD.
YOU SAID THAT THEY WERE
OF CENOMANIAN AGE,
SO HOW DOES THAT FIT
INTO THE GENERAL PATTERN
OF ISTRIAN GEOLOGY?
VLAHOVICH: THE SUCCESSION
OF ISTRIAN DEPOSITS
RUNS FROM MIDDLE JURASSIC
TO MIDDLE EOCENE
AND WE DIVIDED IT INTO
FOUR LARGE-SCALE SEQUENCES
SO CENOMANIAN ROCKS
REPRESENT
PART OF THE THIRD
LARGE-SCALE SEQUENCE
OF ISTRIAN SUCCESSION.
SKELTON: AND THAT THIRD
LARGE-SCALE SEQUENCE
RUNS FROM WHEN TILL WHEN?
VLAHOVICH: IT RUNS FROM
THE END OF THE LOWER ALBIAN
OR BEGINNING
OF THE MIDDLE ALBIAN
UP TO THE UPPER CENTONIAN.
SO IF WE WANT TO GO
AND LOOK AT THE OLDEST ROCKS
OF THAT THIRD
LARGE-SCALE SEQUENCE,
WHERE DO
WE NEED TO GO NOW?
A MAJOR GEOLOGICAL
STRUCTURE OF ISTRIA
IS THE WESTERN
ISTRIAN ANTICLINE.
SO, IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO SEE
THE LOWER BOUNDARY
OF THIS SUCCESSION,
WE SHOULD APPROACH ITS CORE,
SO WE SHOULD GO
TOWARDS THE NORTH
AND TO THE VILLAGE
OF KANFANAR.
NARRATOR: HERE,
IN A QUARRY NEAR KANFANAR,
LIMESTONE FROM THE TOP
OF THE PRECEDING
SECOND LARGE-SCALE SEQUENCE
IS CUT INTO BLOCKS,
WHICH ARE THEN SLICED
AND POLISHED AS FACING STONE.
THE LIMESTONE WAS DEPOSITED
IN EARLY APTIAN TIMES,
IN THE RESTRICTED SHALLOW
WATERS OF A PLATFORM INTERIOR,
WITH SCATTERED CLUMPS
OF RUDIST SHELLS.
AT THE TOP OF THIS LIMESTONE IS
A THIN LAYER OF GREENISH CLAY,
MARKING THE BASE OF THE THIRD
LARGE-SCALE SEQUENCE,
FOLLOWED HERE BY A THIN CAP
OF ALBIAN LIMESTONES.
IN A SMALL,
DISUSED QUARRY NEARBY,
IGOR AND PETER
ARE ABLE TO TAKE A CLOSER LOOK
AT THIS MAJOR
SEQUENCE BOUNDARY.
HERE AT THE TOP
OF THE APTIAN LIMESTONES
WE SEE QUITE
AN IRREGULAR SURFACE
WITH IMPORTANT BUTTRESSES
STICKING UP THERE
WHICH IS TYPICAL FOR SUB-AERIAL
CASTING, WEATHERING,
SO I SUPPOSE THAT
THE CLAYS MUST REPRESENT
SOME KIND OF A FOSSIL SOIL.
SO THE WHOLE PACKAGE THERE
REPRESENTS A PERIOD
OF IMMERSION,
AND THE UPPER ALBIAN
LIMESTONES HERE REPRESENT
THE RETURN
OF MARINE DEPOSITS.
SO WE'RE GOING FROM ABOUT
THE MIDDLE OF THE APTIAN
UP TO THE UPPER ALBIAN,
THAT'S AT LEAST
15 MILLION YEARS.
AND YET DURING
THAT SAME PERIOD OF TIME,
IN BRITAIN FOR EXAMPLE,
THERE'S AN IMPORTANT
TRANSGRESSION,
GOING FROM THE LOWER GREENSAND
UP TO THE GAULT.
HOW WOULD YOU EXPLAIN THEREFORE
THE IMMERSION THAT WE SEE HERE?
WE HAVE DONE A LOT
OF REGIONAL WORK,
AND WE HAVE STUDIED
SEVERAL SECTIONS IN DETAIL
THROUGHOUT THE ADRIATIC
CARBONATE PLATFORM,
WHICH IS
MORE THAN 600 KM LONG.
IN ALL AREAS WE HAVE FOUND
IMMERSION LIKE THIS.
HOWEVER, THE LARGEST
STRATIGRAPHIC GAP
IS HERE IN ISTRIA.
ON SEVERAL LOCALITIES
ALONG THE ISTRIAN ANTICLINE,
WE HAVE MADE DETAILED COLUMNS,
AND WE HAVE FOUND OUT
THAT THERE IS FROM
11 TO 19 MILLION YEARS MISSING.
EXACTLY AT THIS LOCALITY
THERE IS ABOUT
16 MILLION YEARS MISSING.
IN OTHER PARTS
OF THE PLATFORM,
THIS STRATIGRAPHIC GAP
IS MUCH SHORTER,
SO IN SOME PLACES
IT IS ABOUT FIVE MILLION YEARS
IN SOME PLACES ABOUT
THREE OR ONLY TWO MILLION YEARS.
WHAT IS VERY IMPORTANT,
IN THOSE PARTS WE HAVE
UPPER APTIAN DEPOSITS
AND LOWER ALBIAN DEPOSITS.
SO NOT LIKE HERE,
HERE WE'VE GOT ONLY
LOWER APTIAN
AND UPPER ALBIAN.
HOWEVER, THIS EMERGENCE
IS EXACTLY AT THE BOUNDARY
BETWEEN APTIAN AND ALBIAN,
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT IT
FROM THE REGIONAL SCALE,
YOU WILL SEE THAT FOR THAT
YOU HAVE TO HAVE SYN-SEDIMENTARY
TECTONIC CONTROL.
SO THAT'S THE REASON WE HAVE
DIFFERENT AMOUNTS OF SUBSIDENCE
AT THE SAME LEVEL
AND DIFFERENT CONTROL
OVER THE REGIONAL
SUCCESSION OF DEPOSITS.
DIFFERENTIAL SUBSIDENCE
HAS TO IMPLY A TECTONIC CONTROL.
YES, YES.
NARRATOR: THE STRATIGRAPHICAL
SUCCESSION CAN BE FOLLOWED
UPWARDS, AT STOJA COVE
TO THE SOUTH OF PULA,
WHERE MORE OF
THE UPPER ALBIAN LIMESTONES
LIE EXPOSED
ALONG THE SHORELINE.
HERE AT STOJA COVE I'VE COME UP
ABOUT 300 METERS FROM THE BASE
OF THE LARGE-SCALE SEQUENCE,
ALWAYS WITHIN THE UPPER ALBIAN.
THAT PART OF THE SUCCESSION
WAS ENTIRELY DEPOSITED
WITHIN RELATIVELY
SHALLOW WATER.
WE KNOW THAT BECAUSE
AT CERTAIN HORIZONS
YOU CAN FIND DINOSAUR
FOOTPRINTS AND MUD CRACKS.
PROBABLY WITHIN
THAT PART OF THE SUCCESSION
IS A SMALL-SCALE SEQUENCE,
BUT EXPRESSED
ONLY AS RELATIVELY SUBTLE
VARIATIONS IN DEPTH.
WE'VE COME NOW TO
THE UPPERMOST PART OF THE ALBIAN
AND WE STILL HAVE
THESE RELATIVELY THIN
BEDDED LIMESTONES WHICH WERE
DEPOSITED IN SHALLOW WATER,
TYPICALLY ORGANIZED INTO PACKETS
OF SEDIMENTS SUCH AS THIS,
FINE-GRAINED PELOIDAL
WACKY STONES AND PACK STONES
WHICH WOULD
HAVE BEEN DEPOSITED
IN VERY SHALLOW RESTRICTED
SUBTIDAL CONDITIONS,
AND THEN PACKETS
OF BEAUTIFUL STROMATOLITES HERE
WITH THESE
LAMINAR FENESTREE IN.
THESE WOULD HAVE BEEN
DEPOSITED IN INTERTIDAL
OR EVEN
SUPERTIDAL CONDITIONS.
TOGETHER, THEREFORE,
WE CAN RECOGNIZE
WHAT ARE KNOWN AS PERITIDAL
CYCLES FROM SUBTIDAL
TO INTER OR EVEN
SUPERTIDAL CONDITIONS
AND THESE ARE TYPICALLY
THE DEPOSITS THAT WE FIND
IN THE RESTRICTED INTERIOR OF
CRETACEOUS CARBONATE PLATFORMS.
NARRATOR: SLIGHTLY
HIGHER UP THE SUCCESSION,
AT NEARBY CINTINERA COVE,
THE STROMATOLITES
BECOME SCARCER
AND OTHER
SEDIMENTARY STRUCTURES
BEGIN TO MAKE
THEIR APPEARANCE.
I'VE COME UP ONLY ABOUT
20 METERS FROM THE LEVEL
WHERE WE WERE LOOKING
AT THE PERITIDAL DEPOSITS,
AND ALREADY THERE'S
QUITE A BIG CHANGE
IN THE CHARACTER OF
THE SEDIMENTARY STRUCTURES.
HERE.S A VERY NICE EXAMPLE OF
HUMMOCKY CROSS-STRATIFICATION.
HERE IS THE HUMMOCK...
PASSING DOWN HERE
INTO THE SWALE
WITH A VERY
LOW-ANGLED TRUNCATION
OF THE LAMINATIONS BENEATH.
HUMMOCKY
CROSS-STRATIFICATION
IS A CLEAR INDICATOR
OF DEPOSITION
BELOW FAIR-WEATHER WAVE BASE
IN THE OFFSHORE TRANSITION ZONE,
SO ALREADY WE'RE SEEING
EVIDENCE HERE FOR A DEEPENING
OF THE DEPOSITIONAL ENVIRONMENT.
A LITTLE FURTHER UP HERE
THINGS REALLY BEGIN
TO GET QUITE INTERESTING.
AT THIS LEVEL HERE, MORE
EVIDENCE OF STORM DEPOSITION.
HERE ARE SOME RUDIST SHELLS
WHICH HAVE CLEARLY BEEN ROUNDED
AND THEY MUST HAVE BEEN
RE-WORKED AND TRANSPORTED
FROM SOME SHALLOWER
WATER AREA AND WASHED
INTO THIS DEEPER SEDIMENTARY
ENVIRONMENT BY STORM CURRENTS.
JUST A LITTLE
FURTHER UP HERE
ARE SOME BURROWS
WHICH HAVE BEEN FILLED
BY LARGER BENTHIC FORAMINIFERA
KNOWN AS ORBITALINES.
THESE ARE VERY INTERESTING
BECAUSE THIS PARTICULAR
SPECIES OF ORBITALINES
IS THE FIRST
INDICATION THAT WE HAVE
OF DEPOSITION
IN THE CENOMANIAN,
SO ALREADY WE'VE NOW
COME UP INTO THE CENOMANIAN.
NARRATOR: BESIDES
THE SEDIMENTOLOGICAL EVIDENCE
FOR DEEPENING
IN THIS PART OF THE SEQUENCE,
SOME OTHER FEATURES HELP
TO THROW LIGHT ON ITS CAUSE.
OK, IGOR,
WHAT HAVE YOU FOUND HERE?
HERE WE.VE GOT ONE SMALL-SCALE
SYN-SEDIMENTARY DEFORMATION.
HERE AS YOU CAN SEE WE'VE GOT
THIS FLAT SURFACE BELOW,
THEN WE.VE GOT THIS STRUCTURE
WHICH IS CLIMBING--
A SMALL OVERTRUSS
WHICH IS CLIMBING
OVER THIS PART
OF THE SEQUENCE
AND HERE WE.VE GOT
SOME SMALL-SCALE SLUMPS.
THE ORIENTATION IS INTERESTING,
IT IS TOWARDS SOUTH-EAST,
GENERALLY TOWARDS SOUTH-EAST.
AND ON TOP OF THIS STRUCTURE
WE CAN SEE FLAT LAYERS.
THAT MEANS THIS IS INSIDE
ONE PACKAGE OF DEPOSITS.
SO THE WHOLE STRUCTURE IS
ENCASED WITHIN ONE UNIT?
YES.
OK.
HAVE YOU SEEN ANY MORE
OF THESE SORT OF STRUCTURES?
YES, BUT THERE ARE ALSO SOME
SYN-SEDIMENTARY STRUCTURES.
LET.S GO
AND HAVE A LOOK.
HERE.
VLAHOVICH: HERE WE'VE GOT
ANOTHER INTERESTING FEATURE
OF SYN-SEDIMENTARY ORIGIN.
WE'VE GOT
SMALL SCALE GROWTH FAULT.
WE CAN SEE IN THIS HANGING WALL
A STEEPER INCLINATION
OF THESE LAMINATIONS
AND WE CAN SEE THE THICKNESS
WHICH IS HIGHER IN THE HANGING
WALL THAN IN THE FOOTWALL.
SO THAT PROVES THEREFORE
THAT THE FAULT MOVEMENT
MUST HAVE OCCURRED DURING
SEDIMENTATION?
VLAHOVICH: DEFINITELY.
OK, IGOR, THEN HOW DOES THAT FIT
INTO THE REGIONAL PICTURE?
THE ORIENTATION OF ALL THESE
STRUCTURES THAT YOU'VE SEEN
IS TOWARDS SOUTH-EAST,
SO THIS IS THE ORIENTATION
WHICH IS NORMAL TO THE AXIS
OF THE WEST ISTRIAN ANTICLINE.
SO AT THIS MOMENT
WE HAVE A RECORD
OF THE TILTING OF THE AREA
TOWARDS SOUTH-EAST.
SO THAT COULD EXPLAIN
THE SEDIMENTARY EVIDENCE
WE'VE SEEN FOR DEEPENING.
YES, YES.
WE HAVE... WE HAVE
GENTLE INCLINES, RAMP...
SKELTON: OK.
...FROM FORMER FLAT PLATFORM.
AND IS THE DEEPENING
ENTIRELY TECTONIC IN ORIGIN?
DEEPENING IS
MOSTLY TECTONIC IN ORIGIN.
THE PROBLEM IS THROUGHOUT THE
INVERTEBRATE CARBONATE PLATFORM
WE HAVE A WEAK
EUSTATIC SIGNAL AT THIS LEVEL,
SO THERE IS A SMALL
EUSTATIC SEA LEVEL RISE.
BUT IN THIS AREA
AS WELL AS IN THE AREA
OF THE NEIGHBORING ISLAND
OF TERES, WE HAVE...
THIS SIGNAL IS VERY,
VERY MUCH AUGMENTED
BY THE LOCAL
SYN-SEDIMENTARY TECTONICS.
SKELTON: SO THAT'S
CREATING IN EFFECT
A LARGE EXTENDED WEDGE SHAPE
OF ACCOMMODATION SPACE.
VLAHOVICH: YES, YES.
SKELTON: OK.
NARRATOR:
THE BEST WAY TO SEE
HOW THIS NEW ACCOMMODATION
SPACE BECAME FILLED IN
IS TO TAKE A BOAT TRIP
TO THE COASTAL CLIFF
OF FRAAKERISLAND,
A LITTLE TO THE SOUTH OF PULA.
VLAHOVICH: WITH THE OUTCROP
LIKE THIS, WE CAN REALLY SEE
THE LARGE-SCALE ARCHITECTURE
OF THE SEDIMENTARY BODY.
SO HERE AT THE BOTTOM
WE CAN SEE ALBIAN DEPOSITS
WHICH ARE
THIN-BEDDED LIMESTONES.
SKELTON:
OK, THAT'S FORMING THAT...
THAT BENCH WE SEE
ALONG THE BOTTOM THERE?
VLAHOVICH: YES, YES, AND THEY
ARE VERY GENTLE INCLINES.
THIS IS ORIGINAL DIPPING
OF THE... OF THIS LIMB
OF THE WEST
ISTRIAN ANTICLINE.
AND WHAT.S HAPPENING
ALONG HERE?
VLAHOVICH: HERE WE CAN SEE
STEEPLY INCLINED BEDS
OF PROGRADING
CLINOFORMS.
SKELTON: OK, THEY'RE
AT A MUCH STEEPER ANGLE.
VLAHOVICH:
YES, THEY ARE MUCH STEEPER
THAN THE ORIGINAL DIPPING.
OK, AND WHICH DIRECTION
IS THAT THAT'S...?
THEY'RE INCLINED
TOWARDS SOUTH-EAST,
TOWARDS DEEPER PARTS
OF THE RAMP.
ALWAYS THEN...
ALWAYS SOUTH-EAST.
...TOWARDS THE AREA
OF MAXIMUM DEPRESSION.
YES.
NARRATOR: THE UPPER PARTS
OF THESE CLINOFORMS
ARE EXPOSED ON
THE TOP SURFACE OF THE ISLAND,
WHERE CLUES CAN BE FOUND
TO THE ORIGINAL SOURCE
OF ALL THIS MATERIAL.
AND HERE IN THISMARVELOUS
PRESERVATIONAL WINDOW HERE
WE SEE, IF YOU LIKE, THE MAIN
CARBONATE FACTORY FLOOR.
MASSES OF RUDISTS
PRESERVED IN LIFE POSITION
FORMING RELATIVELY THIN,
BUT LATERALLY EXTENSIVE
CARPETS AT THE TOPS
OF THE CLINOFORMS.
THESE PARTICULAR KINDS OF
RUDISTS WE REFER TO IN GENERAL
AS "ELEVATOR RUDISTS"
BECAUSE THEIR CONICAL
OR CYLINDRICAL SHELLS
GREW SEMI-IMPLANTED
IN THE BIOCLASTIC SEDIMENT
THAT WAS PRODUCED
BY THE BREAKDOWN OF EARLIER
GENERATIONS OF SHELLS,
AND THE RUDISTS GREW
IN LITTLE BOUQUETS AND CLUSTERS
THAT SPREAD OVER THE SURFACE
LIKE SHELLY MEADOWS.
HERE'S A LOVELY EXAMPLE OF ONE
OF THESE ELEVATOR RUDISTS,
PRESERVED IN LIFE POSITION,
SEMI-INCLINED
WITH ITS CONICAL APEX OF THE
SHELL DOWN AT THE BOTTOM HERE,
AND WITHIN THE SECTION
YOU CAN SEE THESE FALSE FLOORS,
OR TABULAE AS THEY'RE CALLED,
STILL MAINTAINING
THE HORIZONTAL
IN WHICH THEY WERE FORMED
IN THE ORIGINAL ENVIRONMENT,
SO THAT PROVES
THAT THIS EXAMPLE
IS PRESERVED PERFECTLY
IN LIFE POSITION.
NARRATOR: A MODERN ANALOG
FOR THESE ELEVATOR RUDISTS
IS THE PEN SHELL, PINNA,
WHICH CAN BE FOUND
SEMI-IMPLANTED
IN LOOSE SEDIMENT ALONG
THE COAST OF ISTRIA TODAY,
AT ONLY A FEW METERS DEPTH.
HERE AND THERE ON TOP
OF THE BIOSTROMES
THERE ARE THIN SHEETS
OF BIOCLASTIC SEDIMENT,
CARPETED BY THESE
ELONGATE RUDISTS HERE
OF A VERY DIFFERENT SHAPE
FROM THE ELEVATOR ONES
THAT WE.VE JUST
BEEN LOOKING AT.
THESE ARE WHAT WE CALL
RECUMBENT RUDISTS.
THEY WERE CLEARLY ADAPTED
TO LIVING VERY STABLY,
BUT PRONE
UPON THE SEDIMENT SURFACE
IN AREAS WHERE THE SEDIMENT
WAS BEING SWEPT PAST THEM
BY CURRENTS,
AND NOT ACCUMULATING.
IT SEEMS THAT THESE
MUST HAVE LIVED ON THE TOPS
OF THE ADVANCING BANKS
WITHIN WHICH
THE ELEVATOR RUDISTS
HAD BEEN GROWING.
NARRATOR: THE ISLAND ALSO
HOLDS ARCHAEOLOGICAL INTEREST.
SMALL TRIAL QUARRIES EXCAVATED
BY THE ROMANS IN THEIR SEARCH
FOR SUITABLE BUILDING STONE.
A FEW KILOMETERS
INLAND FROM FRAAKER ISLAND,
THE SAME CLINOFORMS
CAN BE SEEN IN SECTION
IN AN ABANDONED QUARRY.
AND ON THE FLOOR OF THE QUARRY,
THE MATERIAL UNDERLYING
THE CLINOFORMS IS EXPOSED.
HERE AT THE
HORIZONTALLY-CUT FLOOR
AT THE BOTTOM
OF VINKURAN QUARRY,
WE CAN SEE
BURROW SYSTEMS
EXACTLY THE SAME
LIKE IN CINTINERA COVE.
AND THEY ARE FILLED
WITH SAME ORBITALINES.
OK, AND INTERESTINGLY,
HERE ON THIS FLAT SURFACE
WE SEE VERY NICELY
THE Y-SHAPED BRANCHING PATTERN
THAT'S TYPICAL
OF THALASSINOIDES.
AND DIRECTLY ABOVE
THIS LEVEL
THERE ARE CLINOFORMS
THAT WE SAW
AT THE FRAAKER ISLAND.
SO HOW WOULD YOU NOW INTERPRET
THIS PART OF THE SEQUENCE
IN TERMS OF
SEQUENCE STRATIGRAPHY?
VLAHOVICH: THE PART BELOW US
IS VERY HEAVILY BURROW TURBATED
AND ITREPRESENTS
A CONDENSED SECTION.
ABOVE US WE CAN SEE CLINOFORMS
WHICH ARE THE RESULT
OF HIGHSTAND PROGRADATION,
OF SHEDDING
OF SURPLUS MATERIAL.
AND BETWEEN
THOSE TWO PARTS WE CAN PUT
MAXIMUM FLOODING SURFACE
WHEN THE CARBONATE FACTORY
WAS RETREATED TOWARD
THE INNER PART OF THE RAMP.
OK.
RIGHT, LET'S NOW GO
AND LOOK AT THE CLINOFORMS
AND SEE WHAT THEY CONSIST OF.
OK.
SKELTON:
OVER HERE ONE CAN SEE
THESE NICELY
SHARPLY BASED UNITS
WITH A CONCENTRATION
OF VERY EVIDENT RUDIST DEBRIS.
I CAN SEE IT FROM HERE,
IT'S FULL OF MASSES
OF BROKEN-UP
RUDIST DEBRIS,
PASSING UP, I SUPPOSE,
TO BIOCLASTIC MATERIAL
BEFORE THE NEXT UNIT.
I GUESS THESE ARE THE RESULTS
OF SINGLE STORM EVENTS
WHERE RUDIST DEBRIS WAS SWEPT
OVER ONTO THE CLINOFORMS,
SO IF WE MOVE BACK
TO THE MAIN WALL HERE,
WE CAN SEE
THE INCLINED CLINOFORMS
GRADUALLY BECOMING LESS STEEP
AS WE GO UPWARDS UNTIL WE REACH
AT THE TOP THERE I CAN SEE
FROM HERE A SERIES
OF MORE OR LESS HORIZONTAL
RUDIST BIOSTROMES
WHICH WILL BE THE SAME
AS THE ONES WE SAW AT FRAAKER,
OF COURSE THE SOURCE
OF ALL THE MATERIAL
THAT WE SEE
IN THE CLINOFORMS.
NARRATOR: TO RECAP,
THE CONDENSED BED
WITH THE BURROWS
REPRESENTS THE CULMINATION
OF THE TRANSGRESSIVE
SYSTEMS TRACT,
WITH THE MAXIMUM FLOODING
SURFACE AT ITS TOP,
WHILE THE CLINOFORMS
MARK THE INCEPTION
OF THE HIGHSTAND
SYSTEMS TRACT,
INVOLVING PROGRADATION
AND SHALLOWING
AS THE HIGHSTAND SHEDDING
OFSHELLY DEBRIS
DERIVED FROM THE RUDIST MEADOWS
STARTED TO FILL IN
THE ACCOMMODATION SPACE.
WELL, THESE MARKS LOOK
INTERESTING. WHAT ARE THESE?
THESE ARE OLD
ROMAN CHISEL MARKS
BECAUSE THEY EXCAVATED
THE STONE BY CUTTING DEEP,
VERY DEEP GUTTERS
BETWEEN BLOCKS.
AND THEY WERE CHISELED
IN ONE DIRECTION AND THEN
IN THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION,
SO THEY MADE
SOMETHING LIKE
HERRINGBONE STRUCTURE.
AND AFTER THAT, THEY WERE ABLE
TO CUT THE LOWER PART
MAINLY BY PHYSICAL
DISCONTINUITIES,
BY BEDDING PLANES
BETWEEN TWO BLOCKS.
AND WHERE DID
THIS STUFF END UP?
DID THAT GO TO THE ARENA?
YES, THIS IS THE...
THE MAIN QUARRY FROM WHERE
THE MOST OF THE MATERIAL
FOR ARENA WAS EXCAVATED.
NARRATOR: FURTHER SOUTH
ALONG THE COAST, AT TASELERA
ON THE SOUTHERNMOST
HEADLAND OF ISTRIA,
THE REMAINING TOPMOST PART
OF THE HIGHSTAND SYSTEMS TRACT
CAN BE FOUND.
HERE WE ARE, QUITE A BIT HIGHER
IN THE HIGHSTAND SYSTEMS TRACT.
HERE WE CAN SEE
SMALL SCALE CYCLES,
WE CAN SEE
THIN BEDDED LIMESTONES.
IT MEANS WE ARE
AGAIN IN AN INNER PART
OF THE PLATFORM
WITH LOWER ENERGY.
THAT'S INTERESTING ACTUALLY,
BECAUSE IF WE LOOK
AT THE RUDISTS DOWN HERE,
WE DON'T SEE
ANY RECUMBENTS
SUCH AS WE SAW AT FRAAKER,
OR VINKURAN, THOUGH.
JUST ELEVATOR RUDISTS
AND EVEN THESE ARE MUCH SMALLER
THAN THE ONES
WE SAW EARLIER
WITH QUITE THIN SHELLS,
CLUSTERED HERE IN BOUQUETS.
VLAHOVICH: HERE IS ANOTHER
INTERESTING FASCIES
OF THIS LOCALITY. THESE ARE
CHONDRODONTID BIVALVES,
WHICH ARE FOUND BOTH IN
THEIR PRIMARY GROWTH POSITION.
ORIENTED VERTICALLY
WITHIN THE SEDIMENT.
YES, AND REWORKED
BY OCCASIONAL STORMS.
SKELTON: AND THERE THEY'RE
FORMING FLAT SHEETS OF SHELLS.
VLAHOVICH: YES.
NARRATOR:
TELLING PROOF OF A RETURN
TO EXTREMELY SHALLOW CONDITIONS
CAN BE SEEN TOWARDS THE TOP
OF THE HIGHSTAND SYSTEMS TRACT,
EXPOSED ON
A NEARBY SMALL ISLAND,
WHERE DINOSAUR FOOTPRINTS RUN
RIGHT ACROSS THE TOP
OF A RUDIST BIOSTROME.
IN THE AREA OF MEDULIN,
TO THE SOUTH-EAST OF PULA,
A DISTINCT CHANGE IN
THE CHARACTER OF THE SEDIMENTS
AND FOSSILS MARKS
A NEW PHASE OF DEEPENING,
AND THUS THE BEGINNING
OF A NEW MINORSEQUENCE.
IGOR, THIS FACIES HERE
IS COMPLETELY DIFFERENT
FROM WHAT WE.VE BEEN
LOOKING AT LOWER DOWN.
HERE WE SEEM TO HAVE SCATTERED
AMMONITES, A PELAGIC FAUNA,
WHICH WOULD SUGGEST DROWNING
OF OUR PLATFORM.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT
THE AGE OF THIS HORIZON?
THESE AMMONITES
ARE VERY SCARCE. BUT BELOW THEM
WE'VE GOT PLANKTONIC
FORAMINIFERA AND CALCIFEROUS,
AND ON THE BASIS OF
PLANKTONIC FORMANINIFERA
WE ARE DEFINITELY SURE
THAT BELOW THIS LEVEL
THE ROCKS ARE OF
THE UPPER CENOMANIAN AGE.
SO ABOVE THIS LEVEL,
THE ROCKS ARE OF THE TURONIAN.
AND THE AMMONITES?
THE AMMONITES,
MOST OF THEM
ARE ALREADY TURONIAN,
BUT ALSO THERE ARE
SOME UPPERMOST
CENOMANIAN FORMS.
SO THE DROWNING THEN
HAS STARTED TO OCCUR HERE,
A BIT BEFORE THE
CENOMANIAN-TURONIAN BOUNDARY,
WHICH IS WHEN WE SEE DROWNING
IN MANY OTHER PARTS
OF THE WORLD.
HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN THAT?
DURING THE
CENOMANIAN-TURONIAN BOUNDARY,
THE MOST
OF THE PLATFORM WAS ROUND,
SO AT, I WOULD SAY
ABOUT 80% OF THE PLATFORM AREA
WAS ROUND BY THIS EVENT.
BUT...
BUT THAT WAS EUSTATIC.
THAT WAS EUSTATIC, YES.
BUT ALSO AT THE SAME MOMENT,
WE GET SOME
SMALL ISOLATED AREAS
WHICH WERE, WITH CONTINUOUS
SHALLOW WATER DEPOSITION
FROM CENOMANIAN-TURONIAN,
AND IN SOME PLACES,
LIKE IN NORTHERN ISTRIA
OR IN NORTHERN PART
OF THE NEIGHBORING
ISLAND OF TRIES, WE GOT EMERGES,
SO IT MEANS WE GOT
FALSE REGRESSION,
DURING THE SAME PERIOD
WHEN WE HAD
THIS EUSTATIC
SEA LEVEL RISE.
SO THAT.S ALSO INFLUENCE OF THE
LOCAL SYN-SEDIMENTARY TECTONICS.
SO WE'RE GETTING
A TECTONIC ALTERATION
OF THE EUSTATIC PATTERN,
AND HERE,
THEREFORE PRESUMABLY,
SUBSIDENCE IS BEGINNING
JUST A BIT BEFORE
THE CENOMANIAN-TURONIAN
BOUNDARY.
OK, THAT.S INTERESTING.
NARRATOR:
SO, A SIMILAR COMBINATION
OF EUSTATIC SEA LEVEL RISE
AND TECTONIC MOVEMENT
TO THE ONE WHICH OCCURRED
IN THE LATEST ALBIAN SEQUENCE
WAS THEN REPEATED
IN THE LATE CENOMANIAN
TO PROVIDE THE ACCOMMODATION
SPACE FOR A NEW SEQUENCE.
AND SO, NOW WE KNOW
WHERE THE ROMANS
GOT THEIR STONE FROM
TO BUILD THE ARENA.
AND WHO MADE THAT STONE.
INDEED.
LET.S NOW SUMMARIZE
THE MAIN POINTS OF THE PROGRAM.
ESSENTIALLY WHAT
WE WERE CONCERNED WITH
WAS THE DYNAMIC
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
THE BIOLOGICAL
CARBONATE FACTORY
OF A CRETACEOUS
CARBONATE PLATFORM,
AND THE FACTORS
THAT PROVIDED
THE ACCOMMODATION
SPACE FOR ITS GROWTH.
THE PARTICULAR SUCCESSION
THAT WE WERE LOOKING AT
CAME FROM
THE NORTH-WESTERN PART
OF THE ADRIATIC
CARBONATE PLATFORM.
AT THAT TIME
IN THE MID-CRETACEOUS,
THIS WAS
AN ISOLATED PLATFORM
IN THE CENTRAL PART
OF THE TETHYS OCEAN.
IN ISTRIA ITSELF,
WE FIND THAT
THE SUCCESSION
EXPOSED AT THE SURFACE
RUNS FROM THE MIDDLE JURASSIC
TO THE PALEOGENE,
AND CAN BE DIVIDED
INTO FOUR LONG-TERM SEQUENCES.
WE CONCENTRATED
OUR ATTENTION ON THE THIRD
OF THESE LONG-TERMSEQUENCES,
AND WE STARTED
AT THE UNCONFORMITY
THAT MARKS ITS BASE,
WHERE LOWER APTIAN LIMESTONES
HAVE BEEN CAUSTICALLYERODED
AND OVERLAIN BY
A FOSSIL SOIL, THEN FOLLOWED
BY SHALLOW MARINE DEPOSITS
OF LATE ALBIAN AGE.
WE THEREFORE STARTED
OUR INVESTIGATION
WITH EXTREMELY
SHALLOW WATER DEPOSITS
OF LATEST ALBIAN AGE
CONTAINING PERITIDAL CYCLES,
INCLUDING, FOR EXAMPLE,
THE STROMATOLITES
WHICH WERE INDICATIVE
OF A DEPOSITION
IN THE INTERTIDAL
OR EVEN SUPERTIDAL ZONE.
ABOVE THEM
CAME THE DEPOSITS
OF THE TRANSGRESSIVE
SYSTEMS TRACT OF THE SEQUENCE,
WITH EVIDENCE
FOR PROGRESSIVE DEEPENING.
SO WE SAW HUMMOCKY
CROSS-STRATIFICATION
INDICATING THE OFFSHORE
TRANSITION ZONE,
AND FINISHING OFF
WITH A HIGHLY CONDENSED UNIT
THAT HAD BEEN
HEAVILY BURROWED
BUT WERE THE
THALASSONOIDES BURROWS.
ABOVE THE MAXIMUM
FLOODING SURFACE,
WE SEE THE BEGINNING OF
THE HIGHSTANDS SYSTEMS TRACT,
THE REGRESSIVE EPISODE
REPRESENTED BY
THE GROWTH OF CLINOFORMS
TOWARDS THE SOUTH-EAST
AND EFFECTIVELY
FILLING IN THIS ZONE
OF INTRA-PLATFORM DEPRESSION.
AS THE CLINOFORMS EXTENDED
FURTHER TOWARDS THE SOUTH-EAST,
OUR HIGHSTANDS SYSTEMS TRACT
IN THE AREA THAT WE LOOKED AT
BECAME SHALLOWER AND SHALLOWER,
AND SO WE SAW THIN BIOSTROMES
OF JUST ELEVATOR RUDISTS
WITH RELATIVELY THIN SHELLS
ANDSMALL SIZE,
TOGETHER WITH
THE CHONDRODON BIVALVES.
AND VERY NICE EVIDENCE
FOR THE RETURN
OF EXTREMELY
SHALLOW CONDITIONS IN THE FORM
OF THE DINOSAUR FOOTPRINTS
ACROSS THE TOP
OF ONE OF THESE
RUDIST BIOSTROMES.
FINALLY,
THIS SHALLOW PLATFORM SYSTEM
THEN DROWNED AGAIN
IN THE LATEST CENOMANIAN.
AND THE EVIDENCE FOR THAT
WERE THESE PELAGIC DEPOSITS
CONTAINING THE AMMONITES,
MARKING THE BEGINNING OF
A NEW SEQUENCE OF DEPOSITION.
SO OVERALL THEREFORE,
WE HAVE SEEN A PATTERN
OF EXTREMELY
DYNAMIC INTERPLAY BETWEEN
A POTENTIALLY HIGHLY PRODUCTIVE
BIOLOGICAL CARBONATE FACTORY
AND THE PROVISION OF
ACCOMMODATION SPACE
BY A COMBINATION OF
EUSTATIC SEA LEVEL CHANGE
AND IMPORTANT
TECTONIC MOVEMENTS.
OK, IGOR...
[SPEAKS RUSSIAN]
YOU'RE WELCOME.
CAPTIONS: BROADCAST TEXT
WWW.BROADCASTTEXT.COM